---
title: "Lesson 2. Pronouns."
date: "2023-07-09T11:59:59.999Z"
description: "Learning pronouns."
author: "ZyphenSVC"
slug: "telugu/unit-one/lesson-two"
---

# Vocabulary

Feel free to import this into your own quizlets

Country - Desaam

Bag/Backpack - Sanchi

Window - Kitiki

Room - Gadhi

Refrigerator - Fridge

Dog - Kukka

Puppy - Kukkapilla

Cat - Pilli

Kitten - Pillipilla

Rat - Eluka

Phone - Pone

Coffee - Kaphi 

Television - T.V.

Restaurant - Hotel

School - School/Paathasaala

Bank - Bank

Inside - Lopala

Above - Paina

Below - Kinda

Beside - Pakkana

Behind - Venaka

In front - Eduru/Mundu

Here - Ikkadha

# Pronouns

First and foremost, in order to say simple sentences it is important to learn pronouns. Pronouns will allow one to say sentences containing: I, my, you, yours, they, their, we, and so forth. 

|               | Singular                                                                             |                                                                                     | Plural                                      |                             |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|
|               | Nominative                                                                           | Possessive                                                                          | Nominative                                  | Possessive                  |
| First Person  | Naenu (I)                                                                            | Naa (My)                                                                            | Manamu(We), Maemu (We)                 | Mana (Our)  Maa (Our) |
| Second Person | Nuvvu (You), Meeru (You)                                                            | Nee (Your), Mee (Your)                                                             | Meeru (Y'all)                               | Mee (Your)                  |
| Third Person  | Athanu/Vaadu/Veedu (He), Aayana (He), Aame (She), Aavida (She), Idhi (This), Adhi (That) | Dheeni (This), Dhaani (That) | Vaallu (They), Ivi (These), Avi (Those) |                             |

This looks like a complicated chart but let's go ahead a break it down.

## Understanding Each Pronoun

A nominative case is basically a term for something that generally is the subject of the sentence or verb. Sort of like:

"I am doing xyz"

"I" is the subject that is "doing" xyz.

It is also important to recognize a difference in English and Telugu. Many Americans may have learned a second language, perhaps Spanish, French, or German. Similar to those languages, Telugu also has a gendered grammatical system. There is a place for masculine, feminine, and neutral nouns and pronouns.

### First Person

#### <p align="center">నేను (Naenu)</p>

First and foremost we have `Naenu`. This is a pronoun that is used by all genders and just representative as "I". It is important to note the distinction in genders. 

#### <p align="center">నా (Naa)</p>

`Naa` is a posessive case pronoun, which basically means "My" or "Mine". I

#### <p align="center">మనము (Manamu) / మేము (Maemu)</p>

In the plural case, we have `Manamu` and `Maemu`. It might seem weird that we have two words that both mean "we", however, this is actually important to distinguish in Telugu. `Manamu` includes the listener whereas `Maemu` does not. This can lead into a lot clearer distinction in what the speaker may be trying to say. You could be speaking to your best friend and say "We are going to Disney World" but choose to leave them out or not. 

#### <p align="center">మన (Mana) / మా (Maa)</p>

For the final first person pronouns, we have `Mana` and `Maa`, which means ours. Accordingly to how we have `Manamu` and `Maemu`, correlatingly we have these pronouns as such. One has the listener included and the other does not. Once you remember the nominative case, it is easy to remember the possessive case as it is just the same with a few characters removed. 

`Naenu` -> `Naa`

`Manamu` -> `Mana`

`Maemu` -> `Maa`

And we will see that with these next few perspectives.

### Second Person 

#### <p align="center">నువ్వు (Nuvvu) / మీరు (Meeru)</p>

Unlike first person perspective, we have two words that mean "you" in Telugu. This is due to honorifics, which may cause confusion, so let's try our best to explain the difference.

`Nuvvu` is how to speak to someone really familiar or under in age. Whereas `Meeru`, would be someone who is respected such as a grandparent or a professor and so forth. Note that these are also the exact forms that we use to speak in plural tenses.

#### <p align="center">నీ (Nee) / మీ (Mee)</p>

In a second person possessive case we use `Nee` and `Mee`, which similar to `Nuvvu` and `Meeru`, they would be informal and formal. In fact, to further distinguish this case, `Mee` most of the time will be used for older elders.

### Third Person 

#### <p align="center">వీడు (Veedu) / వాడు (Vaadu) / అతను (Athanu) / ఆయన (Aayana)</p>

First for the third person nominative case, we have the "He's". These three may mean the same thing, however, they are all used differently. `Vaadu` is the most informal, depending on the person you are talking to, it may even be offensive. It cannot be said to elders, and seen as improper even when referencing younger folk, however, when approaching certain dialects, this may be the norm. It is important to still recognize it as a commonly used "He". The difference between `Vaadu` and `Veedu` is just proximity. `Veedu` is referenced when the younger person is closer to you, whereas `Vaadu` is further away.

Secondly Athanu is a common place "He". This can be said when referencing anyone and it is important to recognize that this should fit almost all occasions when speaking about someone in the third person.

Lastly, the most formal is Aayana. This is very formal and should only be in reference to older elders, such as your grandparents or in-laws.

#### <p align="center">ఆమె (Aame) / ఆవిడ (Aavida)</p>

For the feminine representatives, we have `Aame` and `Aavida` which both mean "She". The more common form to be spoken is `Aame`, whereas `Aavida` is very formal and usually only references older women. `Aavida` in general is sort of outdated, and though its accepted and people understand, it's a little odd saying the word unless it is really only for **old** older women, sort of like your grandparents. But generally `Aavida` just means anyone who is older than the age of 30 for reference, meaning a full-fledged adult.  

#### <p align="center">ఇది (Idhi) / అది (Adhi)</p>

These two terms reference a neutral term for both people and objects, but in singular tense. `Idhi` and `Adhi` is commonly in reference objects. Though it is sort of like the "They/Them" of our language. What I mean by that is similar to English, "They/Them" is taught in schools as to call anyone that term, which was a thing long before the "LGBTQ+ propoganda" that people blame schools for. In Telugu, `Idhi` and `Adhi` are mostly called to show objects as the subject of the sentence, as it also represents "it".

In order to properly use `Idhi` AND `Adhi` is to also reference women younger than you. `Idhi` being those who are closer and `Adhi` references those who are further from you. This does not have a formality denotion. 

#### <p align="center">వీళ్లు (Veellu) / వాళ్ళు (Vallu)</p>

This references the plural form for "They/Them", which can be used for everyone. However, this really does enforce the plurality similar to `Idhi` and `Adhi`. This is specifically pertaining to people. `Veellu` references those who are close by and `Vallu` are those who are further.

#### <p align="center">ఇవి (Ivi) / అవి (Avi)</p>

Though this may sound really similar to `Idhi` and `Adhi`, this should **NOT** be in reference to people at all. This should only be used for objects and can seem condescending or disrespectful if said about people. This is also a plural form to the "It" pronoun. `Ivi` references those which are close by and `Avi` are those which are further.


#### <p align="center">దీని (Deeni) / దాని (Daani)</p>

This form is in reference to anything non-human, and shows the possessive case in third person. It does have a feminine characteristic, so many people do use this pronoun to reference female possession, however, it is very disrespectful. `Deeni` references objects which are close by and `Daani` are those which are further.

## Notice

In future lessons we will be using past knowledge in our content, therefore it does require one to build their skills on top of each other. It is important to practice.