---
title: "Lesson 3. To Be."
date: "2023-07-09T12:59:59.999Z"
description: "Learning how to use To Be."
author: "ZyphenSVC"
slug: "telugu/unit-one/lesson-three"
---

# Vocabulary

Feel free to import this into your own quizlets

### Nouns

Food - Bhojanam

Cake - Cakeu

Head - Tala

Leg - Kaalu

Finger - Veylu

Ear - Cevi

Arm - Cheyyi

Eye - Kannu

Mouth - Noru

Stomach - Kadupu

Bus - Busoo

Us/We - Maemu/Manamu

Big - Pedda

Small - Chinna

New - Kotta

Old/Worn Out - Patta/Musali

Expensive - Kharindaina

Inexpensive/Cheap - Chavukaina

Beautiful - Andamaina

Fat/Chubby - Laavu

Good - Manchi

### Verbs

To eat - TinuTa

To go - Velluta

To meet - KalisikoTa

To close - MoosuTa

To open - TeravaTa

To want - KoruTa

To make - CheysuTa

To do - CheyimchuTa

To speak - MaatlaadaTa

To understand - TelusukonuTa

To like - IshTapaDuTa

# Subject Object Verb

Telugu has a hard sentence structure that is hard to wrap around the heads of many English speakers. Let's take a look at it.

<h4><p align="center">Subject - Object - Verb</p></h4>
Or
<h4><p align="center">Subject - Adjective</p></h4>

This sentence format is very different to how we speak in English, and its important to recognize its differences. So let's write down a sample sentence demonstrating this difference.

**Sample Sentence**

**English:** I am drinking coffee.

**Telugu:** I coffee drinking.

# To be

Learning the verb "to be" is really weird in Telugu, as is most of the things I have said so far. It just shows to how much different eastern languages are compared to English. 

#### <p align="center">ఉండు (Undu)</p>

The word `Undu` does mean to be, however its not used when it is referencing another noun. Meaning the only other use for this verb is if we are using an Adjective. So let's look at a couple of sample conversations.

**Sample Conversation**

**A:** Namaskaaram, Naa peru John (Hi, my name is John).

**B:** Shabaash John, Nee Telugu bhagundi (Wow John, your Telugu is good).

This really weird conversation shows when `Undu` is used and when it is not used. See if you can spot the difference before reading on.

Person A, stated that their name is John, however, there is no reference to `undu`. This is because, as we stated before, if object of the sentence is a noun, then the sentence does not require `undu`. If we look at Person B, they used an adjective describing John's Telugu being good, with the verb `undu`. Of course in this context it is conjugated, which we will learn soon, but this principle is important to note. 

Take a look at English's verb To Be:

| **To Be** |
|-----------|
| I am      |
| you are   |
| he/she is |
| we are    |
| they are  |

Now let's look at Telugu's verb To Be:

| **To Be**           |
|---------------------|
| Naenu unnanu        |
| Nuvvu unnavu        |
| Meeru unnaru        |
| Manamu/Maemu unnamu |
| Athanu unnadu       |
| Aame undi           |
| Vallu unnaru        |
| Avi unnaiyi         |

So let's look at a couple of sentences that use this.

**Sample Conversation**

**A:** Nuvvu yela unnaru? (How are you?)

**B:** Naenu bhagunnanu, Meeru? (I am good, you?)

**A:** Bhagunnanu, eppudu, yekkara unnavu? (I am good, now, where are you?)

**B:** Naenu inti-lo unnanu. (I am in the house.)

This conversation uses a lot of words you may not know yet, especially these question words, however, it still gets the idea across that you need to recognize that sometimes these words are mixed into the adjective themselves. It was a lot to dissect, so let's look at it a bit further and understand each portion. 

#### <p align="center">**A:** Nuvvu yela unnaru? (How are you?)</p>

So remember before I mentioned that you cannot use this verb when the noun is the object of the sentence. It sounds like a lot to keep up, but it does simplify a lot of things for the language, more than you can imagine right now. Coming back to this sentence, notice there is no noun. There is a (1) Pronoun, (2) Question Word, (3) The Verb. We will learn Question Words in a different lesson, but for now focus on this grammatical structure. There is no presence of a noun, and it is in the format that we mentioned before, of course with a few modifications.

(1) The subject came first
(2) There is a middle portion that can consist of anything, but for now we are only focused on making simple sentences.
(3) The verb/adjective always comes last.

#### <p align="center">Naenu bhagunnanu, Meeru? (I am good, you?)</p>

We have a sentence that contains an adjective. This is important to note because every single time we have an adjective sentence in Telugu, we will still always end using the verb in conjunction. Here the adjective is `bhaga` which means to be in a state of good, and we attach it to `unnanu` since we are using the pronoun `Naenu`.

The rest of the sentences following follow the same format. In fact the third sentence combines both uses as we have shown earlier. Now I understand this may seem really complicated and a lot to keep track of, but I just want you to understand the grammatical structure before we make sentences of that sort. A lot of the apps used for learning the language, don't do that.

Let's make three simple sentences using the following words. Try to figure out where the answer goes, and try to say it out loud.

(1) Naenu, Abbayi

(2) Meeru, Bhaga

(3) Vallu, Baita (outside)

<details>
<summary><b>Answers</b></summary>

(1) Naenu abbayi

(2) Meeru bhagunnaru

(3) Vallu baita unnaru

</details>
<br/>

If you got these answers, congrats you deserve a sticker! Otherwise, don't fret, try to read through the lesson and see which parts you have missed and try again with more words from our Word Banks. Stick to the Pronoun + Adjective + Undi model.

