---
title: "Lesson 4. Using This and That."
date: "2023-07-09T13:59:59.999Z"
description: "Learning how to use this and that."
author: "ZyphenSVC"
slug: "telugu/unit-one/lesson-four"
---

# Vocabulary

Feel free to import this into your own quizlets

### Nouns

Street/Road - VeeDi

Taxi/Cab - Auto

Train - Train

Station - Station

Bus Stop - Bus Stop

Airplane - Plane

Bicycle - Cycle

Wife - Bhariya

Child - BiDDa/Pilla

Son - KoDuku/Komaarudu

Daughter - Kuteru

Husband - Magadu

Father - Nana

Mother - Amma

Letter (Mail) - Lettaru

Taste/Flavour - Ruchi

Meal - Bhojanam

Morning - Tellavari/Podina

Water - Neelu/Manchineelu

Apple - Pandu/Kaya

Money - Dabbu

Finish - Teerchu

Dangerous - Pramaadakara

Handsome - Andamaina

Ugly - Vikaaramaina

Tired - Visikina

Sad - Chedda

Delicious - Ruchiyaina

Many - Chala

Happy - Santoshamgaa

There - AkkaDa

Now - Yippudu

But - Gaani

### Verbs

To come - Vachuta

To finish - Teeruta

To dance - Aadhuta

To know - TelususkonuTa

To walk - Naduchuta

To learn - NerchakonuTa

To think - TalachuTa

To live - BratukuTa

# Let's Begin

We previously learned the pronouns for this and that, however, like English, there is also objective usage. This was looked over in [Lesson 2](www.zyphensvc.com/telugu/level-one/lesson-two) for the sake of formulating a base understanding that this and that can be used as pronouns. Note that pronouns are words that can be used to replace a person in a sentence. With this understanding, notice how in English that we don't exactly use this and that for people, instead, we use them more so for objects. 

# This

#### <p align="center">ఈ (Ee)</p>

This word is used for something within touching distance. If it hasn't been familiar, it is a shortened version of (Idhi), but it is meant to be something that you are actually touching. To differentiate between Ee and Idhi:

(1) Ee is something you are more physically touching or holding.

(2) Idhi is something you can point to but is close in proximity

**Sample Sentences**

(1) Ee ammayi (This girl)

(2) Ee purushudu (This man)

(3) Ee carru (This car)

(4) Ee kurchi (This chair)

(5) Ee stree (This woman)

# That

#### <p align="center">ఆ (Aa)</p>

This word is used for something that is a bit further away. If it hasn't been familiar, it is a shortened version of `Adhi`, but it is meant to be something to be conceptualized rather than be seen. To differentiate between `Aa` and `Adhi`:

(1) `Aa` is something you want to reference but may not have in sight
(2) `Adhi` is something you can point to but is far away in proximity.

**Sample Sentences**

(1) Aa ammayi ee inti-lo undi (That girl is in this house)

(2) Aa purushudu (That man)

(3) Aa carru yekkara (Where is that car?)

(4) Aa kurchi (That chair)

(5) Aa stree (That woman)

# Using this and that with to be

Usage of this and that is important in English and Telugu, but it's equally important to know that it can also be a noun. Another meaning of `Idhi` and `Adhi` is more so "This thing" and "That thing" respectively.

Whereas before we have said:

(1) I like that.

We can now say:

(2) I like that thing.

So now let's get into the application with `Undi`

**Translate the Following**

(1) That girl (Ammayi) is a doctor (Dakter).

(2) That man (Purushudu) is good (Bhagunnaru).

(3) This boy (Abbayi) is a teacher (Teacher).

(4) This thing is a table (Table).

(5) This person (manishi) is a woman (Stree).

(6) That thing is a car (Carru)

<details>
<summary><b>Answers</b></summary>

(1) Aa ammayi dakteru.

(2) Aa purushudu bhagunnaru.

(3) Ee abbayi teacheru.

(4) Idhi tableu.

(5) Ee manishi stree

(6) Adhi carru.
</details>
<br/>